.TH MOSML 1 "18 September 2001" "Version 2.0"
.SH NAME
mosml \- Standard ML interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mosml [\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Invokes the interactive Moscow ML system. The interactive system allows
you to enter declarations and evaluate expressions.
.PP
You can quit the interactive session by typing \fBquit();\fR or
control-D.  Type \fBhelp "lib";\fR for an overview of built-in
function libraries, and e.g. \fBhelp "Array";\fR for help on
\fBArray\fR operations.
.PP
Invoking the interactive system with a list of files \fIFILE\fRs
correspond to invoking it without the file list, and when the
Moscow ML has started entering
\fBuse "file1";\fR ... \fBuse "filen";\fR.
.PP
This manual page documents the options accepted by 
.B mosml.
For more information consult the online manuals.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-conservative\fR
Sets conservative mode for compilation of subsequent units: accept
all extensions to the SML Modules language, but issue a warning for
each use. This is the default.
.TP
\fB\-I\fR \fIdirectory\fR
Specifies directories to be searched for interface files, bytecode
files, and source files.  A call to \fBuse\fR, \fBload\fR or
\fBloadOne\fR will first search the current directory, then all
directories specified by option \fB\-I\fR in order of appearance
from left to right, and finally the standard library directory.
(This option affects the variable \fBMeta.loadPath\fR.)
.TP
\fB\-imptypes\fR
Specifies that the type checker should distinguish between
imperative and applicative type variables, generalize all
applicative type variables, and generalize imperative type variables
only in non-expansive expressions.
.TP
\fB\-liberal\fR
Sets liberal mode for compilation of subsequent units: accept
without warnings all extensions to the SML Modules language.
.TP
\fB\-orthodox\fR
Sets orthodox mode for the compilation of subsequent units: reject
all uses of the extensions to the SML Modules language.  That is,
accept only SML Modules syntax.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR \fIunit-set\fR
Determines which library units will be included and open at
compile-time.  Any library unit in the load path can be used by the
\fBcompile\fR function for type checking purposes.  Thus regardless
\fB\-P\fR option, the \fBcompile\fR function knows the type of
library functions such as \fBArray.foldl\fR.
.RS
.TP
\fB\-P\fR \fIdefault\fR
The initial environment for the SML Basis Library: modules
\fBArray\fR, \fBChar\fR, \fBList\fR, \fBString\fR, and \fBVector\fR
will be loaded, and \fBChar\fR, \fBList\fR, and \fBString\fR will be
partially opened.
.TP
\fB\-P sml90\fR 
This provides an initial environment which is upwards compatible with
that of the 1990 `Definition of Standard ML' and with pre-1.30 releases
of Moscow ML. In particular, the functions \fBchr\fR, \fBexplode\fR,
\fBimplode\fR, and \fBord\fR work on strings, not characters.  The new
versions of these functions are still available as \fBChar.chr\fR,
\fBChar.ord\fR, \fBString.explode\fR, and \fBString.implode\fR.  The
math functions and input-output facilities required by the 1990
Definition are available at top-level.  In addition the same libraries
are loaded as with \fB-P default\fR.
.TP
\fB\-P nj93\fR
This provides a top-level environment which is mostly compatible with
that of SML/NJ 0.93.  The functions \fBapp\fR, \fBceiling\fR,
\fBchr\fR, \fBdec\fR, \fBexplode\fR, \fBfold\fR, \fBhd\fR, \fBimplode\fR,
\fBinc\fR, \fBmax\fR, \fBmin\fR, \fBnth\fR, \fBnthtail\fR, \fBord\fR,
\fBordof\fR, \fBrevapp\fR, \fBrevfold\fR, \fBsubstring\fR, \fBtl\fR,
and \fBtruncate\fR have the same type and meaning as in SML/NJ 0.93.
Note that this is incompatible with SML/NJ version 110. The math
functions and input-output facilities required by the 1990 `Definition
of Standard ML' are available at top-level.  In addition the same (new)
libraries are loaded as with \fB-P default\fR.  This option does not
imply \fB-imptypes\fR.
.TP
\fB\-P full\fR
This loads all the libraries marked \fBF\fR in the library list (see
the online manuals), and partially opens the \fBChar\fR, \fBList\fR,
and \fBString\fR units.
.TP
\fB\-P none\fR
No library units are loaded or opened initially.
.PP
Additional library units can loaded into the interactive system by
using the \fBload\fR function.
.RE
.TP
\fB\-quietdec\fR
Turns off the interactive system's prompt and responses, except for
warnings and error messages.  Useful for writing scripts in SML.
Sets \fBMeta.quietdec\fR to \fBtrue\fR.
.TP
\fB\-stdlib\fR \fIstdlib-directory\fR
Specify the standard library directory to be \fIstdlib-directory\fR. 
The default standard library is \fB/usr/lib/mosml\fR under Debian.
.TP
\fB\-valuepoly\fR
Specifies that the type checker should use `value polymorphism'.
Default.
.SH AUTHOR
Compiled by Henning Niss from the various Moscow ML documents 
written by Sergei Romanenko, Claudio Russo, and Peter Sestoft.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mosmlc (1),
.BR mosmlyac (1),
.BR mosmllex (1)
.PP
The full documentation for
.B mosml
and the other Moscow ML tools can be found in the online manuals in 
\fB/usr/share/doc/mosml/manual.pdf.gz\fR
(`Moscow ML Owner's Manual') and
\fB/usr/share/doc/mosml/mosmllib.pdf.gz\fR
(`Moscow ML Library Documentation').
